Getting Started with
Accessibility, presented by,
Gregory Hammond, who is a website
consultant at Gregory J Development.
There will be no Q&A during
this lightning round,
but please use the ideas section
to chat with other attendees.
Gregory is here in
the chat and in Slack
and can answer your
questions there.
So, take it away Greg.
Why
is a speaker going to talk
in WordPress Accessibility Day?
It's because it's great to have
a refresher for those who make it
to themselves to be experts.
If you are a beginner,
then it's great to know
what the very, very,
very beginning steps should be
and if you're somewhere in
between, don't worry,
you will learn something
from this talk.
All the slides I am showing are
available for viewing and downloading
at your own convenience.
The link for that
is bit.ly/wpad2022.
If you post on Twitter about
this talk or this conference,
you are welcome to tag me.
I'm @DevGregory.
That is D-E-V-G-R-E-G-O-R-Y.
Let's get started with why
accessibility is so important.
I'm sure it's been covered in
this conference already a ton;
however, it's great to remember that
one in every four people identify
as having a disability.
That disability could be something
that's visible or something
that's completely invisible.
You may know someone who has
disability and they proudly say,
Yes, I have a disability,
or you may think, Oh,
I don't have somebody who has a
disability but, they, themselves,
think they do. Accessibility is
so important because, it shows
that you care about everyone
and you want them to be able
to access what you have to offer.
If you don't include accessibility,
you could not include 25%
of your potential audience.
That may not seem like a lot, but
it's 25% could make a big difference.
Since this is a WordPress
Conference, you want
to make sure choose a theme
that is accessibility ready.
If you choose one from WordPress.org,
it makes it so much easier
to find these accessibility themes.
If you go to WordPress.org
for such themes,
you can choose a picture filter
where you can go under the features
and select accessibility ready. When
you search through those filters,
you will see about at this
time 100 different themes.
That may not seem like
very many compared
to how many themes are available,
but there's 100 different themes
you can choose from.
You may be thinking,
What makes a theme, quote unquote,
accessibility ready? According to
the WordPress Theme Review Handbook,
it must include at
least the following:
One, make sure someone only using
a keyboard can use the website.
Number two, make sure anyone who
uses screen reader can identify:
What is a bun?
What is a link, and what is
something for them to fill in?
Number three,
make sure it includes a skip link
so that the screen readers can
skip the menu of the website.
Now that it's your theme, you want
to start thinking about headings
and paragraphs.
H1, known as header one,
should be used once per page.
It is used to identify
what the page is about.
This allows the site to be organized
and makes it easier for everyone
to understand what is important
and what is also important
on the website.
Something we should all consider
is what language is on the website.
I'm not talking about
English or French here,
but the wording is something
that you want those
who read the website to understand.
You can think about
it as how technical
or non-technical do you
want the site to be.
For example, since this is a
talk for beginners, I'm trying
to use simple and plain language,
so everyone can understand
what I’m saying.
If you have a site that's meant for
beginners or meant for everyone,
consider using plain language.
What is often on every
website is images.
This can be great to break up
all of that text on the website;
however, you want to make sure
that those images are accessible.
That means add something
called alt text to the images.
Alt text is used to describe the
image to someone who can't see it.
It can be hard to write
alt text at first.
One suggestion I have, is close
your eyes and try to remember
what is the point in that image
and write your text around that.
You get better
writing it over time.
Every single website
also has color.
Color could just be black and
white, or you can add many,
many colors to it; however,
you want everything on your site
to be [unintelligible]
by everyone.
To ensure this,
want to have a contrast
between the different wording
on the website.
The very minimum you want is
3:1 for large text and 4.5:1
for paragraph text.
As always for accessibility,
the higher the number the better.
Now you may be thinking, What is this
color contrast I’m talking about?
The simplest definition I have
found is quote, a measurement
of the difference if you see a
brightness between two colors,
end quote.
How do you check what the color
contrast is between your background
and the text you actually
have on the website?
My favorite website is
WebAIM’s Contrast Checker,
but there are so many
other [unintelligible 7:34]
and websites which offer this,
so find one that suits you best.
There are also a million different
fonts to choose from; however,
when we think about accessibility,
you have to be careful
with which font you choose.
I want you to think for a moment
about which fonts you have seen
on websites and are
they accessible or not?
Got some themes got
some text in your head?
You think about, OK,
what's accessible and what's not?
You're probably hoping that
I can just list off a number
of different fonts for you to choose
with themes to choose or whatever.
There isn't one or two or five
that could be considered the best.
While many sites offer different
suggestions, I would encourage you
that find some that fit you and your
website or your business the best.
You, also, for fonts,
you want to limit the number
of different fonts you use.
Try to limit that to three or less.
With it now being easy to read
and I think that's assessable,
you want to make sure there's enough
space in the text on the side,
between the letters
and the paragraphs.
That way the reader can know if the
border is [unintelligible 9:04].
You want to make sure the font is
also big enough for somebody to read.
The general suggestion is to start
at 16 pixels and work your way up.
You also may be reading text at
100% zoom or the regular zoom;
however, there are people who
increase that font for many, many,
many reasons.
You want to ensure that
your font can still be read
and you’re wording
at 200% zoomed in.
This is because you
want to make sure
that the text doesn’t lose
any content or functionality.
Many websites love to
include audio or video
and while they can look great, they
can be an accessibility nightmare.
Yeah, they seriously can.
Make sure nothing plays unless the
person viewing the website wants it
to play.
If you include audio or
video, then make sure
to include Closed Captions or
describe what is happening.
Have you ever been to many
websites and thought, Wow,
all of those links look very
similar across [unintelligible]
websites?
Why is that?
Because general suggestion is
to distinguish, what is a link
and what isn't?
The most common way to do this
is have a link be blue in color
and have it be underlined.
Now it stands out, and the person
on the website knows what is a link
and what isn't.
If you set it blue text color,
don't use blue as the link,
use a different color.
Another way to make sure your links
are accessible is by describing
what they do.
Don't use the words,
Learn more or click here.
Use something like,
You can rent a tour or learn more
about our favorite past time .
It helps differentiate with
the different things are.
Accessibility is also
making sure anyone
in the world can visit the
website in the first place.
This means making your website
load as quickly as possible.
The best practice now seems
to be three seconds or less.
If you're unsure how quickly or
how slowly your website loads,
there are many websites
[unintelligible]
that you test that.
My personal favorite
is webpagetest.org.
Of course,
the length of time also depends on
where pn the website is located
and the visitor is located.
Accessibility also means
making sure the site looks good
on the computer as well as a
mobile device, like a phone.
Have you tested how your
site looks on a phone?
Maybe not, because you could
be losing an additional 30%
of your potential customers
if it doesn't look good.
That is more customers.
I know I have talked a ton,
and I included so much information.
What you have to remember is
what may work for one person,
may not work for somebody else.
This is not meant to be an
end-all and a perfect guide
for making your website
100% accessible.
It's a guide to make your
website more accessible.
If you want to see
how your website looks
against some
accessibility standards,
then do a mini website accessibility
evaluation tour like Web IM’s over
at wave.webAIM.org.
To close,
there can be a ton that can be done
to make a website accessible, and
I've just only covered the surface
of the stuff.
Like theme, heading,
language, images,
color, fonts, audio and video,
and links just to name a few.
If you missed anything that I talked
about, my slides are available
for viewing and downloading at
your own pleasure and convenience
at bit.ly/wpad2022.
I would also like to
thank the organizing team
at WordPress Accessibility Day
for everything they have done
that you may see or
may not have seen.
If you have any questions
about what I talked about,
the most convenient for way for
me to contact me through any
of the links like my e-mail
address or my social media
that are available on my website.
My website is gegoryhammond.ca.
Now, call to action, get out there
and make your website
more accessible.